The Basics of Organizing your Work and Time 
Susan R. Johnson 
If you are like most academic physicians, you have too much to do and you feel over-busy.  Although it 
may not be possible to eliminate the increasing external demands on your time or to stop the reduction 
in resources many of us are experiencing, you can improve your productivity by making the most of the 
time under your control.  
I will describe five principles for organizing your work and time that will help you maximize productivity 
and minimize stress.  These approaches are only one piece of the puzzle.  Having Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound – a.k.a. “SMART” -- goals is another; see Bickel, AP&S for more on 
goals.  The third piece is maintaining a high energy level.  “How” is no secret: get enough sleep, eat right, 
exercise, take breaks, stay in the moment, and maintain an optimistic and upbeat attitude (see Loehr 
and Schwartz, 2003).  
Here are the five principles, along with concrete advice as to how to begin to implement each one. 
1. Do it now.  A common characteristic of highly productive people is the habit of dealing with tasks 
immediately (Gleeson, 1998).   The typical response to this advice is to point out that it is impossible to 
do everything "now."  True enough – but about 80% of what comes across your desk each day can be 
done now.  To develop this habit, handle all 2-minute mail, e-mail, and phone messages immediately 
(Allen, 2001). The key is to look at these tasks only when you have time to deal with them.  Eliminate the 
practice of opening and closing messages without responding.  Wait until you have a small block of time 
(say, at least 10 minutes or so), and go through, one by one, without skipping, each piece of paper, 
message, or call slip, and finish each before moving on to the next.  
What about the advice to organize tasks by priorities?  Some experts recommend that tasks should be 
assigned a priority– and then you should only work on the “A’s” until those are done.  Priorities are 
important  -- but to deal with 2-minute items that pour in everyday.  Large backlogs of these “little” 
tasks sap your energy, take up space, and reduce your overall efficiency. Dealing with them right away 
will actually allow more time for high priority projects.   
2. Work from a clear space.  Start by clearing off your desk.  Many academics seem to take perverse 
pride in a messy workspace.  If mess is so common, why clean up?  Working at a clear desk improves 
focus, which in turn improves efficiency and the quality of work. A clear desk declares that you have 
made a commitment to change.   As you de-clutter the entire office, you will feel less overwhelmed, and 
you will waste less time looking for things.   
Some academics who are highly productive appear to thrive in the midst of chaos – however, they are 
often more stressed than they need to be.  For anyone with administrative responsibilities (as head of a 
lab, division, department, committee, course, or other administrative endeavor), an organized 
workspace is critical. 
The rule: nothing on your desk except a telephone, computer, an in/out basket, a coffee cup AND the 
© Susan R Johnson, 2010 
one task / project you are working on at that moment. Banish pencils, pens, the tape dispenser and 
stapler, post it notes, reference books, to drawers or a credenza.   
How to start when you don’t have time? Take everything (except the aforementioned items) and put 
them on the floor.  Your desk is now clear!  The long-term solution is to find a home for everything, but 
for now, just clear off your desk.  See how much better you feel about the work you doing, how much 
calmer you feel walking in to your office and seeing a clear space. Every night when it is time to go 
home, make sure everything is again off the desktop. 
3. Keep track of all your work commitments.   
“List aversion” is common, and for good reason.  Lists scattered about (stuck on the computer monitor, 
tucked in your pocket, taped on the bookshelf above your desk) are more disorienting than helpful. Long 
lists of tasks for the day are usually destined to fail, because the list is long, and, the day never goes as 
planned.   
Here is simple two-part system, which fulfills the cardinal rule of lists:  “remember nothing.”  Part one: 
Keep a single list of every task that you cannot complete immediately (Mayer, 1991).  Include phone 
calls, voice mail, verbal requests, actions items that come out of meetings, thoughts that come into your 
head – everything except new e-mails, which may stay in your inbox.  A legal pad works well. When you 
finish a task, cross it off.  When 2/3 of the items on the page are crossed off, tear off the page, re-record 
all the undone items onto the new page, and keep adding.  This is a running list, not a daily list – it never 
ends, and everything you need to do is on it. Part two: make a folder for every project – that is, anything 
you are doing that has several steps, and accumulates paper. Put all the folders in the same drawer.  For 
example, make one folder for each manuscript, committee, new lecture, trip etc.   A more sophisticated 
system can improve your effectiveness even more (Allen,2002). 
4. Use a single master calendar. 
This critical rule is too often ignored.  Some people have an electronic calendar on their desktop 
computer, a paper-based calendar in their pocket, and a calendar at home, and, each calendar has 
different events listed.  This is a sure fire way to miss deadlines, forget meetings, “double book,” and 
generally feel disorganized.  Pick one calendar as your master, and make sure every appointment is 
listed.  Then you may have secondary calendars with subsets of events – for example, while there is 
every reason to have your home-related commitments on the master calendar there is probably no 
reason to have your complete work schedule on the family calendar at home.   
5. Plan by the week. 
Time management experts agree that planning for the week is best (Gleeson, Allen, Covey).  Daily 
planning leads to frustration, because no day ever goes as planned; trying to plan for more than a week 
is unrealistic because the landscape changes too quickly.  The principles of weekly planning are to stay 
flexible (don’t assign exact times to every task), and to not over-schedule (about half your “free” time 
will get eaten up with emergent work).   
Here is how to get started:  First, estimate how much time will be unscheduled each day.  In addition to 
clinic, teaching sessions, committee meetings, etc., don’t forget to block out time for eating, commuting, 
© Susan R Johnson, 2010 
taking the kids to soccer, routine chores like emptying your in basket and e-mail, etc.  Second, read 
through your entire master list of tasks, and look at each of your project folders.  Make sure these are 
up to date, and, note the things you would like to do in the coming week, using your goals and priorities 
as a filter. Do not assign small tasks to specific times – just get to them when you can.  For a task that 
will involve 30 or more minutes at a time, pencil into a time slot – but remember that you may need to 
move it elsewhere as the week progresses.  That’s it.  The secret to this system is having a complete list 
of all your work, and reviewing the entire list each week.   
Any time and work management system, integrated into your daily life, can improve your productivity.  
These five principles are a good place to start.  In fact, if you implement even one of these suggestions 
you will become more productive.  Later, read one or more of the referenced books.  Get going. Good 
luck! 