Time Management
 10 Strategies for Better Time Management
 Time Management Time Management
 10 Strategies for Better Time Management 10 Strategies for Better Time Management
 Reviewed by: 
Travis P. Mountain 
University of Georgia Extension
2 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
 1. Know How You Spend Your Time
 A time log is a helpful way to determine how you use your  
time. Record what you are doing in 15-minute intervals  
for a week or two. Evaluate the results:  
• Did everything you needed to do get done? 
• Which tasks require the most time? 
• What time of day when you are most 
productive? 
• Where is most of your time is devoted  
(i.e. job, family, personal, recreation)? 
Identifying your most time-consuming tasks 
and determining whether you are investing 
your time in the most important activities 
can help you to determine a course of action. 
Having a good sense of the time required for 
routine tasks can help you be more realistic 
in planning and estimating how much time is 
available for other activities. Many apps exist to 
help you keep track of your time, as mentioned in 
Strategy 3. 
10
 People who practice good time management techniques often find that they:
 • Are more productive.
 • Have more energy for things they need to accomplish.
 • Feel less stressed.
 • Have more free time to do the things they want.
 • Get more things done.
 • Relate more positively to others.
 • Feel better about themselves. (Dodd and Subdheim, 2005)
 Finding a time management strategy that works best for you depends on your personality, ability to self
motivate, and level of self-discipline. By incorporating some, or all the ten strategies below, you can more 
effectively manage your time.
 Strategies for Better 
Time Management
 Strategies for Better 
Time Management
 You cannot manage time; you manage the events in your life in relation to time. 
The term Time Management is a misnomer. 
You may often wish for more time, but you only get 24 hours, 1,440 
minutes, or 86,400 seconds each day. How you use that time depends on 
skills learned through self-analysis, planning, evaluation, and self-control. MUCH 
LIKE MONEY, 
TIME IS BOTH 
VALUABLE AND LIMITED: 
it must be protected, 
used wisely, and 
budgeted.
3. Use a Planning Tool
 Time management experts recommend 
using a personal planning tool to improve 
your productivity. Personal planning tools 
include planners, calendars, phone apps, 
wall charts, index cards, pocket diaries, 
and notebooks. Writing down your tasks, 
schedules, and items to remember can 
free your mind to focus on your priorities. 
Auditory learners may prefer to dictate 
their thoughts instead. The key is to find 
one planning tool that works for you and 
use that tool consistently. 
3 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
 2. Set Priorities
 Managing your time effectively requires a distinction between what is important and what is urgent (MacKenzie, 
1990). Experts agree that the most important tasks usually aren’t the most urgent tasks. However, we tend to let 
the urgent tasks dominate our lives. Covey, Merrill, and Merrill (1994) categorize activities into four quadrants in 
their Time Management Matrix: urgent, not urgent, important, and not important. While activities that are both 
urgent and important must be done, Covey et al. suggests spending less time on activities that are not important 
(regardless of their urgency) to gain time for activities that are not urgent but important. Focusing on these 
important activities allows you to gain greater control over your time and may reduce the number of important 
tasks that become urgent. 
Example Time Management Matrix
 Urgent Not Urgent
 Important
 Do these tasks as soon as possible.
 Examples:
 • Submit job application by 5 p.m.
 • Pick up sick child from school
 • Call plumber to fix leaking toilet
 Defer these tasks until all urgent and important 
tasks have been completed.
 Examples:
 • Schedule dentist appointment
 • Reply to coworker’s email regarding future event
 • Plan family reunion
 Not Important
 Delegate these tasks to the appropriate 
people who can manage them.
 Examples:
 • Help son with homework
 • Pull weeds from flower beds
 • Make dinner for family
 Delete these tasks – they are often time wasters.
 Examples:
 • Respond to social media comments
 • Online shopping
 • Finish watching TV show
 Creating a ‘to do” list is an easy way to prioritize. Whether you need a daily, weekly, or monthly list depends on 
your lifestyle. Be careful to keep list-making from getting out of control. List manageable tasks rather than goals 
or multi-step plans. Rank the items on your “to do” list in order of priority (both important and urgent). You 
may choose to group items in categories such as high priority, medium priority, or low priority; number them 
in order of priority; or use a color-coding system. The goal is not to mark off the most items, but to mark off the 
highest priority items (MacKenzie, 1990). A prioritized “to do” list allows you to set boundaries so you can say 
“no” to activities that may be interesting or provide a sense of achievement but do not fit your basic priorities.
When using a planning tool:
 • Always record your information on the tool itself. Jotting notes elsewhere that must be transferred later is 
inefficient and wastes more time.
 • Review your planning tool daily.
 • Keep a list of your priorities in your planning tool and refer to it often.
 • Keep planning tools synchronized. If you keep more than one, make sure your phone, computer, and 
paper planning tools match.
 • Keep a back-up system.
 Apps on your phone can be great planning tools. Apps typically fall into one of the following categories:
 • Time Trackers – Gain an awareness of how you spend your time.
 • Time Savers – Increase productivity and break time-wasting habits. 
• Task Managers – Prioritize and organize tasks to improve time management.
 • Habit Developers – Create healthy habits to encourage time management.
 4. Get Organized
 Disorganization leads to poor time management. 
Research has shown that clutter has a strong 
negative impact on perceived well-being 
(Roster, 2016). To improve our time 
management, get organized. 
Set up three boxes (or corners of a room) 
labeled “Keep,” “Give Away,” and “Toss.” 
Sort items into these boxes. Discard 
items in your “Toss” box. Your “Give 
Away” box may include items you  
want to sell, donate, or discard. 
keep
 give 
away
 toss
 T
 he next step is to improve the time 
you spend processing information. 
For example, tasks such as email can 
eat up your day. To combat wasted time, 
implement an email organization system 
that allows you to process the information in 
each email as efficiently as possible. Use folders, 
f
 lagging, or a color-coded system to keep track of 
what’s what. 
5. Schedule Appropriately
 Scheduling is more than just recording what must be done (e.g., meetings and appointments). Be sure to build in 
time for the things you want to do. Effective scheduling requires you to know yourself. Your time log should help 
you to identify times when you are most productive and alert. Plan your most challenging tasks for when you have 
the most energy. Block out time for your high priority activities first and protect that time from interruptions.
 Schedule small tasks such as drafting an email, creating a grocery shopping list, reading, watching webinars or listening 
to podcasts for long commutes or when waiting for a call or appointment. Capitalize on what would otherwise be time 
lost. Avoid nonproductive activities, such as playing games or scrolling through social media. Limit scheduled time to 
about three-fourths of your day to allow for creative activities such as planning, dreaming, and thinking.
 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
 4
6. Delegate: Get Help from Others
 Delegating means assigning responsibility for 
a task to someone else, freeing up your time 
for tasks that require your expertise. Identify 
tasks others can do and select the appropriate 
person(s) to do them. Select someone with the 
appropriate skills, experience, interest, and 
authority needed to accomplish the task. Be 
specific. Define the task and your expectations 
while allowing the person some freedom to 
personalize the task. Check how well the person is 
progressing periodically and provide any assistance, 
being careful not to take over the responsibility. Finally, 
reward the person for a job well done or make suggestions 
for improvements if needed. (Dodd and Sundheim, 2005).
 Another way to get help is to “buy” time by obtaining goods 
or services that save time. For example, paying someone to 
mow your lawn or clean your house, or joining a carpool for 
your children’s extracurricular activities frees time for other 
activities. The time-savings from hiring someone for 
specialized projects is often worth the cost. 
7. Stop Procrastinating 
People put off tasks for a variety of reasons. 
Perhaps the task seems overwhelming or 
unpleasant. To help stop procrastination, 
consider “eating the big frog first.” A quote 
commonly attributed to Mark Twain says, 
“If it’s your job to eat a frog today, it’s best 
to do it first thing in the morning. And 
if it’s your job to eat two frogs, it’s best 
to eat the big frog first.” Unpleasant 
tasks we procrastinate completing 
are “big frogs.” Complete these 
tasks as your first action of the 
day to get them out of the way. 
Another option is to “snowball” 
your tasks by breaking them down 
into smaller segments, completing 
preparatory tasks, and eventually 
completing the larger task at hand. 
Whether you choose the “big frog first” 
or “snowball” method, try building in a 
reward system for completed tasks to 
help stay motivated.
 5 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
8. Manage Time Wasters
 Reduce or eliminate time spent in these activities by implementing some simple tips.
 Handheld Devices
 • Take advantage of voice-to-text features such as transcribed voicemails or to 
make notes or draft emails and text messages when you are on the go.
 • Avoid small talk. Stay focused. 
• Take any necessary action immediately following a call.
 • Impose screen time limits and regularly monitor your digital wellness (see Strategy 10). 
• Schedule breaks from your devices.
 Email
 • Set aside a specific time to view and respond to email, but don’t let it accumulate 
to the point it becomes overwhelming to sort.
 • Turn off notifications for email. 
• Handle each item only once if possible. 
• Immediately delete or unsubscribe from junk emails.
 • Keep address books up-to-date and organized. 
• Utilize built-in shortcuts to sort email. 
Unexpected Visitors
 • Schedule time for face-to-face visits.
 • Inform visitors of your time constraints and politely offer to reschedule. 
• Set a mutually agreeable time limit for the visit.
 • When someone comes to the door, stand up and have your meeting standing 
to help keep it brief.
 In-Person and Virtual Meetings 
• Know the purpose of the meeting in advance.
 • Arrive early.
 • Start and end the meeting on time.
 • Prepare an agenda and stick to it.  
Use a timed agenda, if necessary.
 • Don’t schedule meetings unless 
they are necessary and have a 
specific purpose or agenda.
 • Use recording software or 
designate a note-taker. 
Family Obligations
 • Use and sync virtual calendars 
for easy sharing between busy 
family members.
 • Make each family member 
responsible for consulting the master 
calendar for potential conflicts.
 • Create a central area or 
agreed upon app for posting 
communications such as 
appointment reminders, 
announcements, and 
messages.
 6 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
7 UGA Cooperative Extension Circular 1042  |  Time Management
 9. Avoid Multi-tasking
 Psychological studies have shown that multi-tasking does not save time. In fact, the opposite is often true. You 
lose time when switching from one task to another, resulting in a loss of productivity (Rubinsteim, Meyer, and 
Evans, 2001). Routine multi-tasking may lead to difficulty in concentrating and maintaining focus. Do your best 
to focus on just one task at a time by keeping your area clear of distractions, including turning off notifications 
on your devices, and set aside dedicated time for specific tasks. 
10. Stay Healthy
 The care and attention you give yourself is an important investment of time. Scheduling time to relax or do 
nothing helps you rejuvenate physically and mentally, enabling you to accomplish tasks more quickly and easily. 
Be sure to monitor your screen time as a part of your digital wellbeing, 
setting boundaries to stay healthy. A study conducted by 
Google showed that four out of five study participants 
who took steps to improve their digital wellbeing 
believe their overall wellbeing was positively 
impacted as well (Google, 2019). To improve 
your digital wellbeing, set time limits or 
utilizing built-in software on electronic 
devices such as phones and tablets to 
help maintain your digital wellness. 
Blue light blockers and grayscale 
mode may also help you improve 
your digital wellbeing. Set a time 
each night to shut off all digital 
devices to give your mind time 
to relax; this can also help 
improve your sleep schedule.
 Unfortunately, poor time 
management and too much 
screen time can result in fatigue, 
moodiness, and more frequent 
illness. To reduce stress, reward 
yourself for time management 
successes. Take time to recognize 
that you have accomplished a major 
task or challenge before moving on to 
the next activity.
 Conclusion
 Whatever time management strategies you use, take 
time to evaluate how they have worked for you. Do you have 
a healthy balance between work and home life? Are you accomplishing the tasks  
tasks that are most important in your life? Are you investing enough time in your own personal wellbeing? If 
the answer is “no” to any of these questions, then reevaluate your time management strategies and transition 
to ones that will work better for you. Successful time management leads to greater personal happiness, more 
accomplishments at home and at work, and a more satisfying future